Functions, Grade 11 

University Preparation MCR3U 

This course introduces the mathematical concept of the function by extending students' experiences with linear and quadratic relations. Students will investigate properties of discrete and continuous functions, including trigonometric and exponential functions; represent functions numerically, algebraically, and graphically; solve problems involving applications of functions; investigate inverse functions; and develop facility in determining equivalent algebraic expressions. Students will reason mathematically and communicate their thinking as they solve multi-step problems. 

Prerequisite: Principles of Mathematics, Grade 10, Academic 

MATHEMATICAL PROCESS EXPECTATIONS 

The mathematical processes are to be integrated into student learning in all areas of this course. 
Throughout this course, students will: 

Problem Solving 
• develop, select, apply, compare, and adapt a variety of problem-solving strategies as they pose and solve problems and conduct investigations, to help deepen their mathematical understanding;

Reasoning and Proving 
• develop and apply reasoning skills (e.g., use of inductive reasoning, deductive reasoning, and counter-examples; construction of proofs) to make mathematical conjectures, assess conjectures, and justify conclusions, and plan and construct organized mathematical arguments; 

Reflecting 
• demonstrate that they are reflecting on and monitoring their thinking to help clarify their understanding as they complete an investigation or solve a problem (e.g., by assessing the effectiveness of strategies and processes used, by proposing alternative approaches, by judging the reasonableness of results, by verifying solutions); 

Selecting Tools and Computational Strategies 
• select and use a variety of concrete, visual, and electronic learning tools and appropriate computational strategies to investigate mathematical ideas and to solve problems; 

Connecting
• make connections among mathematical concepts and procedures, and relate mathematical ideas to situations or phenomena drawn from other contexts (e.g., other curriculum areas, daily life, current events, art and culture, sports); 

Representing  
• create a variety of representations of mathematical ideas (e.g., numeric, geometric, algebraic, graphical, pictorial representations; onscreen dynamic representations), connect and compare them, and select and apply the appropriate representations to solve problems; 

Communicating
• communicate mathematical thinking orally, visually, and in writing, using precise mathematical vocabulary and a variety of appropriate representations, and observing mathematical conventions. 
 
A. CHARACTERISTICS OF FUNCTIONS 

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS 

By the end of this course, students will: 

1. demonstrate an understanding of functions, their representations, and their inverses, and make connections between the algebraic and graphical representations of functions using transformations; 
2. determine the zeros and the maximum or minimum of a quadratic function, and solve problems involving quadratic functions, including problems arising from real-world applications; 
3. demonstrate an understanding of equivalence as it relates to simplifying polynomial, radical, and rational expressions. 

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS  

1. Representing Functions 

By the end of this course, students will: 

1.1 explain the meaning of the term function, and distinguish a function from a relation that is not a function, through investigation of linear and quadratic relations using a variety of representations (i.e., tables of values, mapping diagrams, graphs, function machines, equations) and strategies (e.g., identifying a one-to-one or many-to-one mapping; using the vertical-line test) 
Sample problem: Investigate, using numeric and graphical representations, whether the relation x = y2 is a function, and justify your reasoning. 

1.2 represent linear and quadratic functions using function notation, given their equations, tables of values, or graphs, and substitute into and evaluate functions [e.g., evaluate f (1/2), given f(x) = 2x2 + 3x – 1] 
 
1.3 explain the meanings of the terms domain and range, through investigation using numeric, graphical, and algebraic representations of the functions f(x) = x, f(x) = x2, f(x) = [square root symbol]x, and f(x) = 1/x; describe the domain and range of a function appropriately (e.g., for y = x2 + 1, the domain is the set of real numbers, and the range is y = 1); and explain any restrictions on the domain and range in contexts arising from real-world applications 
Sample problem: A quadratic function represents the relationship between the height of a ball and the time elapsed since the ball was thrown. What physical factors will restrict the domain and range of the quadratic function? 

1.4 relate the process of determining the inverse of a function to their understanding of reverse processes (e.g., applying inverse operations) 

1.5 determine the numeric or graphical representation of the inverse of a linear or quadratic function, given the numeric, graphical, or algebraic representation of the function, and make connections, through investigation using a variety of tools (e.g., graphing technology, Mira, tracing paper), between the graph of a function and the graph of its inverse (e.g., the graph of the inverse is the reflection of the graph of the function in the line y = x) 
Sample problem: Given a graph and a table of values representing population over time, produce a table of values for the inverse and graph the inverse on a new set of axes. 

1.6 determine, through investigation, the relationship between the domain and range of a function and the domain and range of the inverse relation, and determine whether or not the inverse relation is a function 
Sample problem: Given the graph of f(x) = x2, graph the inverse relation. Compare the domain and range of the function with the domain 
and range of the inverse relation, and investigate connections to the domain and range of the functions g(x) = [square root symbol]x and h(x) =–[square root symbol]x. 

1.7 determine, using function notation when appropriate, the algebraic representation of the inverse of a linear or quadratic function, given the algebraic representation of the function [e.g., f(x) = (x – 2)2 – 5], and make connections, through investigation using a variety of tools (e.g., graphing technology, Mira, tracing paper), between the algebraic representations of a function and its inverse (e.g., the inverse of a linear function involves applying the inverse operations in the reverse order) 
Sample problem: Given the equations of several linear functions, graph the functions and their inverses, determine the equations of the inverses, and look for patterns that connect the equation of each linear function with the equation of the inverse. 

1.8 determine, through investigation using technology, the roles of the parameters a, k, d, and c in functions of the form y = af (k(x – d)) + c, and describe these roles in terms of transformations on the graphs of f(x) = x, f(x) = x(2), f(x) = [square root symbol]x, and f(x) = 1/x (i.e., translations; reflections in the axes; vertical and horizontal stretches and compressions to and from the x- and y-axes) 
Sample problem: Investigate the graph f(x) = 3(x – d)2 + 5 for various values of d, using technology, and describe the effects of changing d in terms of a transformation. 

1.9 sketch graphs of y = af (k(x – d)) + c by applying one or more transformations to the graphs of f(x) = x, f(x) = x(2), f(x) = [square root symbol]x, and f(x) = 1/x, and state the domain and range of the transformed functions 
Sample problem: Transform the graph of f(x) to sketch g(x), and state the domain and range of each function, for the following: 
f(x) = [square root symbol]x, g(x) = [square root symbol](x – 4); f(x) = 1/x, g(x) = - 1/x + 1. 

2. Solving Problems Involving Quadratic Functions 

By the end of this course, students will: 

2.1 determine the number of zeros (i.e., x-intercepts) of a quadratic function, using a variety of strategies (e.g., inspecting graphs; factoring; calculating the discriminant) 
Sample problem: Investigate, using graphing technology and algebraic techniques, the transformations that affect the number of zeros for a given quadratic function. 

2.2 determine the maximum or minimum value of a quadratic function whose equation is given in the form f(x) = ax(2) + bx + c, using an algebraic method (e.g., completing the square; factoring to determine the zeros and averaging the zeros) 
Sample problem: Explain how partially factoring f(x) = 3x(2) – 6x + 5 into the form f(x) = 3x(x – 2) + 5 helps you determine the minimum of the function. 

2.3 solve problems involving quadratic functions arising from real-world applications and represented using function notation 
Sample problem: The profit, P(x), of a video company, in thousands of dollars, is given by P(x) =– 5x(2) + 550x – 5000, where x is the amount spent on advertising, in thousands of dollars. Determine the maximum profit that the company can make, and the amounts spent on advertising that will result in a profit and that will result in a profit of at least $4 000 000. 

2.4 determine, through investigation, the transformational relationship among the family of quadratic functions that have the same zeros, and determine the algebraic representation of a quadratic function, given the real roots of the corresponding quadratic equation and a point on the function 
Sample problem: Determine the equation of the quadratic function that passes through (2, 5) if the roots of the corresponding quadratic equation are 1 + [square root symbol]5 and 1 – [square root symbol]5. 

2.5 solve problems involving the intersection of a linear function and a quadratic function graphically and algebraically (e.g., determine the time when two identical cylindrical water tanks contain equal volumes of water, if one tank is being filled at a constant rate and the other is being emptied through a hole in the bottom) 
Sample problem: Determine, through investigation, the equations of the lines that have a slope of 2 and that intersect the quadratic function f(x) = x(6 – x) once; twice; never. 

3. Determining Equivalent Algebraic Expressions* 

By the end of this course, students will: 

3.1 simplify polynomial expressions by adding, subtracting, and multiplying 
Sample problem: Write and simplify an expression for the volume of a cube with edge length 2x + 1. 

3.2 verify, through investigation with and without technology, that [square root symbol]ab = [square root symbol]a x [square root symbol]b, a [greater-than or equal to sign] 0, b [greater-than or equal to sign] 0, and use this relationship to simplify radicals (e.g., [square root symbol]24) and radical expressions obtained by adding, subtracting, and multiplying [e.g., (2 + [square root symbol]6)(3 – [square root symbol]12)]  

3.3 simplify rational expressions by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing, and state the restrictions on the variable values 
Sample problem: Simplify 2x/(4x(2) + 6x) 3 –(2x + 3), and state the restrictions on the variable. 

3.4 determine if two given algebraic expressions are equivalent (i.e., by simplifying; by substituting values) 
Sample problem: Determine if the expressions 2x2 – 4x – 6/x + 1 and 8x2 – 2x(4x – 1) – 6 are equivalent. 

*The knowledge and skills described in the expectations in this section are to be introduced as needed, and applied and consolidated, as appropriate, in solving problems throughout the course. 

B. EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS 

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS 

By the end of this course, students will: 

1. evaluate powers with rational exponents, simplify expressions containing exponents, and describe properties of exponential functions represented in a variety of ways; 
2. make connections between the numeric, graphical, and algebraic representations of exponential functions; 
3. identify and represent exponential functions, and solve problems involving exponential functions, including problems arising from real-world applications. 

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS  

By the end of this course, students will: 

1. Representing Exponential Functions 

1.1 graph, with and without technology, an exponential relation, given its equation in the form y = ax (a[greater-than sign] 0, a [not equal to symbol] 1), define this relation as the function f(x) = ax, and explain why it is a function 

1.2 determine, through investigation using a variety of tools (e.g., calculator, paper and pencil, graphing technology) and strategies (e.g., patterning; finding values from a graph; interpreting the exponent laws), the value of a power with a rational exponent (i.e., x (m/n), where x[greater-than sign] 0 and mand nare integers) 
Sample problem: The exponent laws suggest that 4(1/2) x 4(1/2) = 4(1). What value would you assign to 4(1/2)? What value would you assign to 27(1/3)? Explain your reasoning. Extend your reasoning to make a generalization about the meaning of x(1/n), where x[greater-than sign] 0 and nis a natural number. 

1.3 simplify algebraic expressions containing integer and rational exponents [e.g., (x(3)) ч (x(1/2)), (x(6)y(3))1/3], and evaluate numeric expressions containing integer and rational exponents and rational bases [e.g., 2(–3), (–6)3, 4(1/2), 1.01(120)] 
 
1.4 determine, through investigation, and describe key properties relating to domain and range, intercepts, increasing/decreasing intervals, and asymptotes (e.g., the domain is the set of real numbers; the range is the set of positive real numbers; the function either increases or decreases throughout its domain) for exponential functions represented in a variety of ways [e.g., tables of values, mapping diagrams, graphs, equations of the form f(x) = a(x) (a[greater-than sign] 0, a [not equal to symbol] 1), function machines] 
Sample problem: Graph f(x) = 2(x), g(x) = 3(x) and h(x) = 0.5(x) on the same set of axes. Make comparisons between the graphs, and explain the relationship between the y-intercepts. 

2. Connecting Graphs and Equations of Exponential Functions 

By the end of this course, students will: 

2.1 distinguish exponential functions from linear and quadratic functions by making comparisons in a variety of ways (e.g., comparing rates of change using finite differences in tables of values; identifying a constant ratio in a table of values; inspecting graphs; comparing equations) 
Sample problem: Explain in a variety of ways how you can distinguish the exponential function f(x) = 2(x) from the quadratic function f(x) = x(2) and the linear function f(x) = 2x.

2.2 determine, through investigation using technology, the roles of the parameters a, k, d, and c in functions of the form y = af (k(x – d)) + c, and describe these roles in terms of transforxmations on the graph of f(x) = a (a [greater-than sign] 0, a [not equal to symbol] 1) (i.e., translations; reflections in the axes; vertical and horizontal stretches and compressions to and from the x- and y-axes) 
Sample problem: Investigate the graph of f(x) = 3(x – d) – 5 for various values of d, using technology, and describe the effects of changing d in terms of a transformation. 

2.3 sketch graphs of y = af (k(x – d)) + c by applying one or more transformations x to the graph of f(x) = a (a [greater-than sign] 0, a [not equal to symbol] 1), and state the domain and range of the transformed functions 
Sample problem: Transform the graph of f(x) = 3(x) to sketch g(x) = 3 –(x + 1) – 2, and state the domain and range of each function. 

2.4 determine, through investigation using technology, that the equation of a given exponential function can be expressed using different bases [e.g., f(x) = 9(x) can be expressed as f(x) = 3(2x)], and explain the connections between the equivalent forms in a variety of ways (e.g., comparing graphs; using transformations; using the exponent laws) 

2.5 represent an exponential function with an equation, given its graph or its properties 
Sample problem: Write two equations to represent the same exponential function with a y-intercept of 5 and an asymptote at y = 3. Investigate whether other exponential functions have the same properties. Use transformations to explain your observations. 

3. Solving Problems Involving Exponential Functions 

By the end of this course, students will: 

3.1 collect data that can be modelled as an exponential function, through investigation with and without technology, from primary sources, using a variety of tools (e.g., concrete materials such as number cubes, coins; measurement tools such as electronic probes), or from secondary sources (e.g., websites such as Statistics Canada, E-STAT), and graph the data 
Sample problem: Collect data and graph the cooling curve representing the relationship between temperature and time for hot water cooling in a porcelain mug. Predict the shape of the cooling curve when hot water cools in an insulated mug. Test your prediction. 

3.2 identify exponential functions, including those that arise from real-world applications involving growth and decay (e.g., radioactive decay, population growth, cooling rates, pressure in a leaking tire), given various representations (i.e., tables of values, graphs, equations), and explain any restrictions that the context places on the domain and range (e.g., ambient temperature limits the range for a cooling curve) 
Sample problem: Using data from Statistics Canada, investigate to determine if there was a period of time over which the increase in Canada's national debt could be modelled using an exponential function. 

3.3 solve problems using given graphs or equations of exponential functions arising from a variety of real-world applications (e.g., radioactive decay, population growth, height of a bouncing ball, compound interest) by interpreting the graphs or by substituting values for the exponent into the equations 
Sample problem: The temperature of a cooling liquid over time can be modelled by the exponential function T(x) = 60 [1/2](x/30) + 20, where T(x) is the temperature, in degrees Celsius, and x is the elapsed time, in minutes. Graph the function and determine how long it takes for the temperature to reach 28[degree sign]C. 